Add expressions design document (#17640)
hazelcast/hazelcast: docs/design/sql/08-expressions.md

> # SQL Expressions

Reviewer: Does it make sense to mention `HazelcastOperandTypes.notAny/notAllNull` methods? What is the main motivation to have them? 
For example, why `notAllNull` is used in the `UNARY_MINUS`? Couldn't we convert `-NULL` to just `NULL` without throwing an error?

Author: clarified in d1d2929413835f7a462bc88686630dd57203b27c

## Overview

> Expressions is one of the core elements of every SQL implementation.

Reviewer 2: Expressions _**are**_

Author: fixed in d1d2929413835f7a462bc88686630dd57203b27c

Expressions can participate in projections (`SELECT a + b FROM t`) and
filters (`SELECT * FROM t WHERE a + b < 10`). Expressions may be roughly
subdivided into 4 general categories:

- Terminal expressions not referring to other expressions: column,

>   literal, parameter and type expressions.

Reviewer 2: What are type expressions?

Author: `CAST(1 AS INT)`, `INT` is referring to a type, clarified in d1d2929413835f7a462bc88686630dd57203b27c

Reviewer 2: But these can refer to other expressions, cant' they? You can do `CAST(1+column1+UPPER(col2)) as INT`. So they don't belong to this category.

Author: I meant the `INT` part itself, it provides a reference to a type in expressions, in Calcite it's represented as `SqlIdentifier` which is a subclass of `SqlNode`, so it's a regular AST node.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense this way, I never thought of the `INT` as of a _type expression_. I'll suggest an alternative text to current version though.

validation. Every SQL expression goes through the following stages:

- Parsing
- Validation
- Conversion
- Translation
- Evaluation

### Parsing Stage

The goal of the parsing stage is to obtain an AST expression
representation from the textual expression representation for
syntactically valid constructs and report errors for invalid ones. For
instance, `a + b` is syntactically valid and `a +` is invalid.

In Calcite, AST nodes are represented as subclasses of `SqlNode`. Column
and type references are represented by `SqlIdentifier`. Literals are
represented by `SqlLiteral` and its subclasses. Parameters are
represented by `SqlDynamicParam`. Most other, if not all, expressions
are subclasses of `SqlCall`.

### Validation Stage

The goal of the validation stage is to make sure that the AST
expressions produced by the previous parsing stage are semantically
valid. For instance, `1 + 1` is semantically valid while `1 + true` is
not.

In Calcite, the validation logic is encapsulated and orchestrated by
implementations of `SqlValidator`. Specifically, `SqlValidatorImpl`
extended by `HazelcastSqlValidator` is used to customize the validation

> logic to align it with our requirements.

Reviewer: Can we define these requirements?

Author: clarified in d1d2929413835f7a462bc88686630dd57203b27c

As a first step of the validation process, `SqlValidatorImpl` may apply
some transformations to the passed AST which should not affect the
semantics of the AST. Such transformations are called "unconditional
rewrites" (see `SqlValidatorImpl.performUnconditionalRewrites`). Every
`SqlCall` node has an associated `SqlOperator` returned by its
`getOperator` method. `SqlOperator` implementations may customize
various aspects of a certain operator including the rewriting behavior
itself (see `SqlOperator.rewriteCall`).

Normally, Calcite's parser inspects the hardcoded `SqlStdOperatorTable`
implementation of `SqlOperatorTable` to resolve a certain operator, so
it's hard to customize the pre-existing operators. To make the
customization possible, operators from `SqlStdOperatorTable` are patched
to the ones from `HazelcastSqlOperatorTable` during the AST rewriting
process (see `HazelcastSqlValidator.performUnconditionalRewrites` and
`HazelcastOperatorTableVisitor`).

Usually, semantic validation requires assigning types to every
expression and its operand expressions, if any. In Calcite, that type
assignment behavior may be customized in several ways:

> - `SqlValidator.deriveType` may customize the behavior globally.

Reviewer: Can we have a paragraph that explains, how all these pieces interact with each other? Namely:
- `SqlValidator.deriveType` - when is it called and how does it relate to `SqlOperator.deriveType`?
- `SqlOperandTypeInference` - when does it come into play?
- `SqlOperandTypeChecker` - same as above, and how it relates to `SqlOperator.checkOperandTypes` and `SqlOperator.getOperandCountRange` methods that have overrides in out classes (e.g. why `HazelcastSqlCastFunction` overrides `checkOperandTypes`?)

Author: clarified in d1d2929413835f7a462bc88686630dd57203b27c

- Each `SqlOperator` implementation may customize its operand type
  inference strategy (see `SqlOperandTypeInference` and
  `SqlOperator.getOperandTypeInference`) and its return type inference
  strategy (see `SqlReturnTypeInference`,
  `SqlOperator.getReturnTypeInference` and
  `SqlOperator.inferReturnType`). The first one is used only if some of
  the operand types are unknown. Also, operand type validation strategy
  can be customized using an associated `SqlOperandTypeChecker` (see
  `SqlOperator.getOperandTypeChecker`).

- Additionally, some expressions require their operands to be coerced to
  a certain type. For instance, `=` operator requires both of its sides
  to be of the same type. In Calcite, such coercion services are
  provided by `TypeCoercion` implementations. Specifically,

>   `TypeCoercionImpl` extended by `HazelcastTypeCoercion` is used to

Reviewer: Can we have an extended description of how the coercion works (built-in and our own), how it relates to `01-type-system.md` conversions, what are the current problems, and possibly - how we are going to deal with it in the future?

Reviewer: For example, we have `HazelcastTypeCoercion` that does some inference, and also `SqlOperandTypeInference` that passed to many operators, plus several custom implementations of this interface located in the `HazelcastInferTypes`. 
How do they relate to each other?

Author: clarified in d1d2929413835f7a462bc88686630dd57203b27c

  customize the coercion logic.

The following general rules apply when assigning types:

- Literals: `TRUE` and `FALSE` literals receive `BOOLEAN` type; numeric
  literals containing no decimal point (`1`, `42`, etc.) receive the
  smallest integer type possible (`TINYINT`, `SMALLINT`, `INTEGER` or
  `BIGINT`); numeric literals containing decimal point (`1.1`, `4.2`,
  etc.) receive `DECIMAL` type; scientific notation numeric literals
  (`1e1`, `4.2e2`, etc.) receive `DOUBLE` type; string literals
  (`'foo'`) receive `VARCHAR` type.

> - Parameters: parameter types are inferred from the context: `1.0 + ?`,

Reviewer: Since the proper parameter inference is still an open question, can we have more examples of how it is actually performed in our product at the moment? For example, comparison and binary arithmetic functions have one inference strategy, while simple functions do it differently.

Author: clarified in d1d2929413835f7a462bc88686630dd57203b27c

>   the parameter would receive `DOUBLE` type.

Reviewer 2: We should mention the issue with `SELECT ?` here.

Author: added in d1d2929413835f7a462bc88686630dd57203b27c

semantically valid AST (`SqlNode`) received from the previous stages to
a representation suitable for the relational optimization. In Calcite,
relational nodes are represented by subclasses of `RelNode` while
expression nodes referenced from relational ones are represented by
subclasses of `RexNode`.

During conversion Calcite also applies various simplifications and
optimizations to expressions (see `SqlToRelConverter` and
`HazelcastSqlToRelConverter`). After the conversion all references to
the original textual SQL query representation are irreversibly lost. In
other words, it's impossible to recover a `SqlNode` from a certain
`RexNode` or `RelNode`.

The resulting expressions may also undergo various transformations as
dictated by relational optimizations applied in other parts of the SQL
engine.

### Translation Stage

The goal of the translation phase is to translate the `RexNode`
representation received from the previous stage to a representation
suitable for the runtime evaluation of expressions.

The translation is performed by `RexToExpressionVisitor` with the help
of `RexToExpression`. Every instance of `RexNode` is translated into a

> corresponding `Expression` instance:

Reviewer 2: Colon at the end?

Author: fixed in d1d2929413835f7a462bc88686630dd57203b27c

The final result of the translation stage is an `Expression` tree ready

> for runtime evaluation. No further changes expected to the tree after

Reviewer 2: No further changes _**are**_

Author: fixed in d1d2929413835f7a462bc88686630dd57203b27c

# SQL Expressions

## Overview

Expressions are one of the core elements of every SQL implementation.
Expressions can participate in projections (`SELECT a + b FROM t`) and
filters (`SELECT * FROM t WHERE a + b < 10`). Expressions may be roughly
subdivided into 4 general categories:

> - Terminal expressions not referring to other expressions: column,
>   literal, parameter and type (as seen in `CAST`) expressions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Terminal expressions not referring to other expressions: column
  references, literals, dynamic parameters and type expressions (i.e.
  the type argument of the `CAST` expression).
```

the parameters in this specific case. Alternatively, we might take into
account the actual types of the passed parameter arguments and construct
separate query plans based on that information, that way we would not
need any one-size-fits-all defaults. `NULL` as a type is not a
first-class citizen in Calcite: basically, every `NULL` literal
participating in some operator or function must have a concrete type
assigned, therefore `NULL + NULL` is affected by the same type inference
problem, which might be solved by making `NULL` type a first-class
citizen or by choosing some defaults.

After all unknown types are inferred and assigned to nodes, type for
every tree node can be derived from the node itself potentially
consulting its child nodes for their types. Most operators have an
additional round of type refinement called type coercion. For instance,
both sides of the binary comparison operators are coerced to the same
type respecting type precedence and conversion rules defined in [Type
System design document](01-type-system.md). Another example is the
binary arithmetic operators coercing their operands to a common type.

> The coercion can be customized by providing a custom `TypeCoercion` (see

Reviewer: AFAIK this is not the main problem. The bigger problem is that we allow implicit conversions for those pairs, that are defined explicitly in the `01-type-system.md`. For example, `LENGTH(intCol)` will just work fine, while INT -> VARCHAR explicit conversion is prohibited. 

I would advise to mention it in the document explicitly:
1. We currently do incorrect implicit conversions that otherwise should be explicit only - these invalid conversions are performed by Calcite code, not ours, and this should be fixed somehow in the future
1. We currently do not understand whether we should have this `implicit/explicit` notion at all, or whether allowed conversions should be defined on the operator level. Or maybe we should have `implicit/explicit` conversions *and* per-operator overrides.

Author: fixed in 2311497e69a49d9d38938c7b67de723ef9cbceaf
